---
layout: post
title:  "Adeline"
date:   2019-01-08
last_modified_at: 2020-13-08
categories: [Short Stories]
---
---
## 1
---

Adeline, a bright spark on an unbroken plain, had her mouth wrapped around a burning cigarette pointing towards a fire devastating a distant forest.

--It&#39;s ill fitting, muttered her companion, Miss Dumont.

Once Adeline&#39;s nanny, she&#39;d been retained past Adeline&#39;s adolescence because of her encyclopedic knowledge and pinpoint manners. All stolen, as she put it, from her brother&#39;s books in bursts.

--They give you wrinkles, you know? she said. Many women can&#39;t handle them at all. Constitutions are too delicate. I worry that-

--Miss Dumont… be quiet.

She took a final drag, sucking down as much as she could. The harsh smoke scraped against her throat then settled in her lungs. She held till she was bout to burst. Ex-hail. Mary the mater. The duke. Her cig-smoke billowed into the sky, a miniature of its coal-black cousin rising miles away and obstructing the Sun.

--Come on then, Miss Dumont, said Adeline, tossing what remained of her cigarette into the grass. There it remained, flickering, fighting to stay alive as the wind roared. The wind had changed. It was coming towards them now. It swept across the plain, tugging violently at the tall grass. The distant fire and smoke came with it. From miles away Adeline could stare at the inferno impetuously. It couldn&#39;t get her.

--They&#39;re going to have your head if they see you smoking those things, chided Dumont, trailing Adeline by several strides.

The girl, her legs long, her strut swift, smacked her boots hard against the ground with every step, as if trying to imprint forever the shape of her boot-bottom into the soil. Humans years from then would come across the footprints and look down curiously, wondering, what moron made those?

--Let them have my head, Adeline muttered. Don&#39;t much care for it. Nobody ever bothered putting anything useful into it.

--Please, could you wait a moment? asked Dumont, huffing and puffing behind.

But Adeline did not stop. Within a minute she arrived at a circle of men on the plain: her father, her brothers, the butler, a fidgeting colonel, other assorted officers.

They stood near the carriages holding on the road. The drivers lounged nearby, unconcerned with the fiery rebellion raging around them, threatening to envelop them. They were content with their cigs or pipes, content to stare into the sky, watching the smoke creep across, forced ever forward by the thick wind. Adeline&#39;s youngest brother stood far down the plain, just within shouting distance, talking to their duelists and a squad of cavalry. Beyond him, closer still to the fire: hundreds of soldiers, like flies in tar, milling around, clutching their rifles, cursing and joking nervously. Their eyes never drifted far from the burning forest.

--Adeline, this is no place for you, her father said upon noticing her. Go find your mother and stay with her.

Adeline looked for her mother but did not see her. Probably in a carriage, the one with its curtains drawn, fanning herself and complaining. Adeline did not move. Her father turned his eyes away and promptly forgot about her. The fidgeting colonel was speaking.

--They&#39;ve blocked the area ahead, he said. They have too many. I don&#39;t think we can push through.

--And the way behind us is no good, said Adeline&#39;s oldest brother. For obvious reasons.

--Are they coming for us? asked her father.

A massive man. His beard, once well groomed, fell from his face in tangles. It, like the rest of him, was soaked in sweat.

--Not at the moment, said the colonel. They lack organization. But I suspect that they&#39;ll come for you and your family soon, Your Grace.

Though everyone in the circle expected this, the colonel&#39;s comment nevertheless sent a ripple through their ranks.

--Your men will fight them off, right? said Adeline&#39;s oldest brother.

--We will try. But I believe they have too many. My concern, presently, is your safety. I hesitate to mount a defense unless necessary. I prefer that we evacuate unnoticed.

--Rider approaching! came a call from down the plain.

A lone figure, as dark as the smoke, thundering through the ranks. His horse&#39;s eyes ablaze, its mane jumping from its neck. The man, hardly a man, was terribly wounded. Blood poured from his chest. A bullet had ripped through his right arm. The limb hung uselessly, fluttering about as dead appendages do. The horse was also wounded, shot through the flank. Mad death-throes consumed it.

--Colonel Granet, the man yelled.

A guttural scream, drawing air from his soul, not his lungs. With every syllable a bit of him evaporated. He came to a stop before the group and, after acknowledging Adeline&#39;s father with a brief nod and an utterance of &quot;Your Grace,&quot; began spitting words at the colonel. Jumbled and confused. Could the colonel discern meaning from this fella&#39;s flood of words?

--The 1st and 2nd Infantry have turned. They&#39;re marching to engage the 3rd. Colonel Bouchard is looking to fight &#39;em. He&#39;s sending messengers to find assistance. He&#39;s to the northeast, just past the creek, trying to hide from the rebels till he can get help. But I don&#39;t think it&#39;ll be long till they find him.

--You&#39;re telling me the 1st and 2nd mean to fight their brothers?

--I think they&#39;ll demand the 3rd&#39;s surrender, but Colonel Bouchard isn&#39;t keen on complying. He says he&#39;ll die for the queen before he surrenders to a mob.

--Where are you from?

--2nd Cavalry, sir. Although it&#39;s safe to say we&#39;ve been mustered out. Our barracks were burned and most of the boys surrendered or turned. I got out and found Colonel Bouchard, so I&#39;ve been running messages.

--Indeed, said Granet, glancing back at the plume of black smoke. I can only give Colonel Bouchard my best wishes. Do you know of anyone else? What of the 1st Cavalry? What of the artillery? What of General Morin?

--Don&#39;t know where he&#39;s at. Don&#39;t know about the artillery or cavalry, either. Sorry sir, can&#39;t help you much with information. It&#39;s chaos all over, best as I can tell. We&#39;re surrounded on all sides. Most of the nearby towns are in arms or in flames. Trains aren&#39;t moving and the lines have been cut. The militias are refusing to fight or turning. I only know of Colonel Bouchard needing help near the creek.

--Fine… you&#39;re doing your part, at least, said Colonel Granet, rubbing his sweat-soaked chin. Do you need medical attention?

--Too busy. I was told to find Colonel Bouchard help. If you can&#39;t be spared, then I&#39;ll have to continue on.

The soldier turned his horse and, just before spurring him onwards, turned to the colonel and said,

--Sir, this might not be my place, but I doubt your whole regiment is gonna slip away unnoticed. If it was up to me, I&#39;d take His Grace and his people with a smaller escort and try to escape in the chaos.

--Thank you for your advice, son, said the duke, his voice booming. We&#39;ll take it into consideration. Now fly. Find Colonel Bouchard his reinforcements.

The soldier was gone, his horse again taken to a mad gallop, a single figure flying across the vast plain while the world crumbled and burned.

--Perhaps a smaller party would be best, said the duke&#39;s eldest, Andre. It would attract less attention.

--They&#39;ll be combing this whole area for carriages, said Granet. We might be able to escape with some disguises. Perhaps don robes and take horses?

--The duchess wouldn&#39;t survive, said the duke. No, the carriages are a must.

--Very well, Your Grace, said Colonel Granet, who wanted nothing more than to abandon Her Grace. She&#39;d spent the entire afternoon whining about the heat while Colonel Granet fought tooth and nail to keep her alive. He was certain she wasn&#39;t sick in any physical sense. Who could judge the state of her soul?

--But please, Your Grace, keep in mind that carriages are beacons to those who are hunting you.

--I will not be lectured by a colonel, said the duke.

Then, to Andre,

--Go get Pierre.

Andre ran off to fetch the duke&#39;s youngest, still gasconading with the family&#39;s duellists and several officers.

--You and you, said the duke, pointing at Adeline and Miss Dumont. I thought I told you to find the duchess.

--Smoke!

The group froze and turned. A young man with no beard, looking through a spyglass, had called it. The device was unnecessary to see the massive puffs of smoke in the distance, far to the right from where the black plume rose but doomed to mix eventually with the all encompassing black smoke as the wind swept creation towards eventuality. The world stretches. Noise on the periphery. Distorted, digital. Some kind of technical malfunction. Still, for now the two new puffs of smoke could be discerned.

--One yellow, one green, shouted the man with the spyglass.

--That&#39;s where Colonel Bouchard is, near the creek, said Granet.

--What do those smokes mean? the duke demanded. A yellow and a green?

--Calling for aid, said Granet. He didn&#39;t send them up earlier because he didn&#39;t want the mob to know his position. He&#39;s sending them up now because-

--He&#39;s being engaged, said the duke. The rebels are this close to us?

--The south is your best option, Your Grace. You&#39;ll be safe if you can get through the forest to Canteburg.

--Fine, to the south, said the duke.

The smoke hung in the sky, still for a moment while the humans scurried about the plain. Unreal time set to pause. Did the humans notice? Did Adeline? What had they done with Prometheus&#39; gift? Such a grotesque mutilation. The gray-goddess leaping from Hephaestus&#39; skull while Prometheus wept. The world reversed, something that preceded them, preceded itself, a primordial deity. Erebus? hanging in the sky, laughing, his mouth filled with teeth?

---

It took longer for the duke&#39;s family and servants to set off than it should have. Colonel Granet had to hand-select the soldiers to escort them, and the duchess had to valiantly overcome &quot;something close to heat stroke.&quot; Then they were on the move.

Granet&#39;s thirty finest men accompanied them. Veterans of previous wars. Forever fighting. Their foes seemed, to them, real and immediate, seared inexorably into the Earth. They heralded sharp but somehow murky bangs blasting deep in their ears, and the pervasive stench of hot metal. But nobody else knew who they were fighting. Always loudly fighting something, someone. So many sorts of someones. Battered and bloody. Unreal. They had to exist at some point, right?

The soldiers hated Adeline and her family, bouncing around in their carriages. Half of them meant to slip away at the first opportunity. The other half, more angry at the rebels for presenting them flesh to shoot than with Adeline for vampirically draining them of their life force, meant to fight to the end.

Closer to the carriages marched the duke&#39;s personal guard, twenty rough but fundamentally picayune persons who would fight because it was what they signed up to do. Finally: a lesser noble, the wife of a baronet who&#39;d fallen in with the group by chance during their early flight. She&#39;d been, at that time, worried bout the rebels but, having let her head cool, she realized the rebels wanted those above her much more than they wanted her. She intended to slip away the moment she spotted civilization, and divulge whatever information the rebels wanted in return for fair treatment.

The only men truly loyal to the family: their duellists. They might have been able to discourage the scattered insubordination in their escorts&#39; ranks, but, spoiled as they were, they sat inside the carriages with their patrons.

Colonel Granet, who fully expected that the duke was gonna get captured or killed, was ecstatic it wouldn&#39;t happen under his watch. He gathered what remained of his wretched regiment and, contradicting what he told the messenger, marched to Colonel Bouchard&#39;s aid. Bouchard&#39;s promises of grandeur had lasted until bullets began to whiz. He&#39;d surrendered by the time Granet arrived. He turned and implored Granet to do the same, arguing that the rebels&#39; cause was just and reasonable, and that they were much less mob-like than he&#39;d previously believed.

Granet refused, but gave the soldiers in his regiment the opportunity to choose for themselves. He watched in horror as the majority of them turned. With only a handful of men left, and an overwhelming force of angry peasants, professional soldiers, and seemingly everyone else facing him down, he formally surrendered. It took the rebels thirty seconds of interrogation (polite inquiry, really) to find out where the duke and his family had gone.

---

Gray had covered the sky as long as Adeline could remember. It extended forever, hovering over the infinite, lightly forested world. Went back infinitely in time too. If the time before Adeline was infinite, how could Adeline be? Because she was?

But the gray didn&#39;t go forward into the future. It was replaced with black. First the smokey black rising from the conflaid forest; the wind, ever thicker, carrying the smoke across the world until creation resembled a burning snow globe, a fire raging within a dome, smoke spreading until it baked everyone within. Then the black of night. Had there been a night before? Adeline could hardly recall. Her brain, bouncing around in her head bouncing on her shoulders bouncing in the carriage bouncing on the road, struggled to conjure the memory of even a single midnight moment. Only gray. Gray within her father&#39;s estate, gray within her father&#39;s eyes. Her own face, she imagined: a pallid gray.

The epic phase of flight had ended. Drudgery reigned. Fearful, difficult, exhausting. Stomping through the forest, their lantern-light dancing on the thick tree trunks, every wood-rustle a billion jolts. The human body can only maintain adrenaline-overdrive for so long. Did the soldiers outside feel the same? Surely.

Stuffed in the two-bench carriage: Adeline, her duellist, her mother, her mother&#39;s duellist, and Miss Dumont. Their teeth clattered as their carriages bumped. They weathered the bumps in their own way, in their own, infinitely complex fashion. Fighting off indescribable fears.

Adeline&#39;s mother saw death. She wouldn&#39;t shut up. Words spilled from her mouth like vomit. Panicked and hectic, she dumped them into her lap. The others present, her duellist excluded, looked at her with pity and disgust. That wretched woman, an eternity of silence spread out before her, thought to make use of her oral faculties while she retained them.

--I don&#39;t understand this. We&#39;ve done nothing to these people. Why do they mean to harm us? I… it&#39;s savage. They&#39;re hideous. It&#39;s hideous, what they&#39;re doing. Will the estate be caught in that dreadful fire? Surely someone will stop it before it comes to that, right?

--I&#39;m sure someone will, muttered Adeline.

She stared at the curtain covering the carriage&#39;s right window. She imagined the soldiers lumbering along beside them. She imagined the black horrors lurking far-off, but thundering closer, thundering across the field as the carriage bumped sluggishly along.

Adeline&#39;s mother fell silent. Her head shot to the side like an alarmed bird. She craned to hear the disturbance outside the carriage. Somebody was shouting, but his accent was too thick and the sound too muffled to make out his words.

--What&#39;s going on? Adeline&#39;s mother said. I demand to know what is happening out there.

Another voice responded to the first. Much clearer. He was yelling something about an ambush.

Adeline&#39;s duellist, Lavaud, peeked out of the window. He pushed the curtain away with a single finger, creating a sliver of visibility into the outside world, enough for him but not enough for the women or his fellow duellist.

--We&#39;ve entered a particularly thick part of the forest, he said. I think they&#39;re worried about us running into an ambush.

--What forest is this, anyway? Adeline&#39;s mother asked.

--I don&#39;t know, Your Grace. I&#39;m terribly sorry, Lavaud replied. But I wouldn&#39;t worry about an ambush. The rabble isn&#39;t organized enough to pull it off. At the very best they&#39;ll stage a raid, riding up on their horses and such. We&#39;ll fend them off. Even if they beat the hikers outside, they won&#39;t beat myself or Miot.

--Of course they won&#39;t, said Miot absentmindedly. He brought his hand to his pistol. A gorgeous six shooter, silver, sitting in a holster on his hip. His fingers caressed the grip. Yes, it existed. He returned his hand to his lap.

On his chest, overtop his azure braided white dolman, was his sash. Bright red, brutally bright, a red that battered anybody who looked at it. An aggressive red. On his sash: his medallions, meticulously pinned and polished, gleaming in the carriage&#39;s tight interior lamplight. Ten medallions, like ten corpses, arrayed below his own, pinned to his dolman directly, over his heart. His medallion, shaped like a shield, was white with a red eagle. The eagle&#39;s wings were unfurled, its beak was open, its eyes were crazed, its feathers were on fire. A hunter diving, claws open, at its prey. While Miot intended it to elicit fear, Adeline thought it boring. Every duellist had the same lame medallion. Some beast displaying primal rage. Something meant to scare. Her own duellist, Lavaud, had a medallion of the same type. A red shield with an angry black dragon breathing orange fire. The only medallion she ever liked had been a white circle with a splatter of black. As if its owner had taken his brush and flung some paint, decided it sufficed, and pinned it to his chest. He wore the medallion proudly, almost mockingly.

Lavaud and Miot also wore their ridiculous white capes. On Lavaud&#39;s cape, hidden from view at the moment: her father&#39;s coat of arms, another boring color with another angry beast.

She wore the same cape. And more or less the same sad uniform. A Prussian blue braided white dolman that squished her breasts. A collar that wrung her throat when she slouched her head, white pants that suffocated her legs, a gold sash that pressed into her stomach, and white boots that squeezed her feet and were impossible to keep clean. Still, she thought, her getup was preferable to the dress Miss Dumont had to wear. At least Adeline and her mother had a choice, though her mother, much larger than Adeline, had made the wrong one. She was poured into her get-up. But almost worse was the huge silk bonnet she wore on her head. Complete with a stuffed bird atop it. The bird&#39;s beady eyes stared at Adeline, asking her why she allowed such absurdity to persist. A too-small military-style duchess uniform and a silk bonnet with a dead bird. That&#39;s what your mother is wearing. Why is she wearing a dead bird?

Adeline didn&#39;t know why her mother wore a dead bird. She didn&#39;t know why her mother did nearly anything she did. She didn&#39;t know why duellists killed one another, in their own name or in hers, or why they took each other&#39;s medallions and pinned them to their sashes so the whole world could see that they were killers. She didn&#39;t know why she had a duellist, and she didn&#39;t know why her duellist fought so much (though less than her mother&#39;s) because she wasn&#39;t sure what he was defending, because she was convinced whatever honor she once had had long ago billowed into the air, like smoke from a fire.

---

## 2
---

Adeline and her family were attacked early in the night, a few hours after dark. The attack or, more accurately, the screams that preceded it, awoke Adeline and her mother immediately, neither of whom had been sleeping soundly to begin with.

Lavaud peeked out of the window. He still went to lengths to ensure that the women didn&#39;t get a view, as if protecting their sensibilities was worth anything at that point.

--It&#39;s the rebels, he said, confirming what everyone knew. Please don&#39;t fret, the soldiers will fight them off.

He let the curtain go and sat back, taking a deep breath as he did so.

--The soldiers will not suffer the indignity of losing to such a mob.

Lavaud&#39;s confidence in the soldiers was misplaced. As misplaced as his confidence in the system that sustained him. The soldiers that&#39;d been planning to slip away turned, while the other half, no longer sure who to trust, began firing wildly. When the rebel riders arrived, they found their adversaries already in a panic. Their war cries had sowed more discord than they&#39;d expected. Pleased, they nurtured the chaos, adding their own shots and shouts.

--They&#39;re going to kill us! screamed Miss Dumont, her education doing nothing to depress the dread that overcame her as thoughts of nonexistence filled her head.

--We need to-

Bullets ripped through the carriage. Splinters shot in every direction. Miss Dumont went silent. She sat still, utterly silent, staring at Adeline, her eyes leaking primal horror. She began opening and closing her mouth, like a caught fish, trying to speak but realizing nothing would come.

--Damn it, said Lavaud as he jumped on top of Adeline in a valiant effort to shield her. Adeline screamed and, in her panic, punched her duellist in the stomach. He reeled back, more surprised than hurt. Adeline&#39;s mother screamed without purpose… sound and fury and all that. Her eyes darted around the carriage and, finding it an ill-fitting tomb, she screamed louder.

--Please, stop that screaming, shouted Miot.

--I can&#39;t die here. I can&#39;t, said Adeline as she kicked open the carriage door, ripping it off its dainty hinges. The door flew through the air and produced a dull thud as it hit some poor soul&#39;s face. Adeline didn&#39;t see who it hit, she was too busy darting from the carriage and into the chaos.

--Lady Adeline, wait, screamed Lavaud as he jumped after her.

Adeline was overwhelmed by the smokey haze, the shouting, the death. Her mind failed. Her ears rang as the shots sounded off around her. Hell embodied on Earth; her new eternity. She barreled into a figure, perhaps a soldier, perhaps a rebel. Both she and he fell to the ground. The man looked up at the duke&#39;s daughter, his mouth agape, but he couldn&#39;t react before she&#39;d gotten up and shot off, her cape billowing behind her, her father&#39;s coat of arms already riddled with holes.

The man she ran into had been a rebel and, unfortunately for Adeline, he&#39;d just finished reloading his weapon. He grabbed it out of the dirt, flung around, and took aim. Just before he fired Lavaud tackled him and, after a short grabble, pistol whipped the rebel, removing him from the fight.

Adeline ran for hours. Or minutes? Maybe mere seconds. Stretched improbably thin. She was in the forest, and exhausted thoroughly. She collapsed onto her stomach. There she lay, breathing heavily as her cape, having chased her the entire run, came to rest gently atop her, her father&#39;s coat of arms covering her like a blanket, shielding her from the cold and dark of the savage forest.

---

Adeline didn&#39;t fall asleep, but she made no attempt to move for some time. She lay still until she heard a rustle. Leaping up, she was prepared to run when a gloved hand grabbed her and the attached person said,

--Lady Adeline, please, calm down!

--Lavaud, she said. Oh… oh God… I thought you were one of the mob.

--I&#39;m not, but they are surely coming to find us. Why did you feel the need to run off like that? I thought I&#39;d lost you. Only God&#39;s divine grace allowed me to find you again.

--I… I panicked. Seeing Miss Dumont… shot… my mother&#39;s screaming…

--Had you said something, I would have been better positioned to protect you.

--I… I&#39;m sorry…

--Very well, then, we have to figure out our next move. Are you hurt? How well can you see?

--I&#39;m unhurt. I&#39;ve only tripped. And my eyes have adjusted.

--Then we should continue forward. They&#39;ll be looking for us. Hold my hand so you don&#39;t trip again.

--We… we should continue forward?

--Of course, said Lavaud. He furrowed his brow in confusion. What else can we do?

--I thought… we should head back…

--Lady Adeline.

--No, no… I understand, she said, turning away so Lavaud wouldn&#39;t see the tears forming in her eyes. I don&#39;t need it explained to me.

--I&#39;m terribly sorry.

--Don&#39;t think me a fool, said Adeline.

--Your decision to dart away saved us, said Lavaud.

He wondered whether it was appropriate to comfort Adeline with a touch. He decided it was, and if it wasn&#39;t, nobody would protest, and so he reached out and patted Adeline on the shoulder. She dove into him, sobbing, her head pressed against the medallions once belonging to men he&#39;d killed for her honor, medallions she hated.

--I&#39;m awful, she cried. Look at me, look how terrible I am.

--Nonsense, you&#39;re not terrible. A duellist of honor would never fight for someone terrible. And I am nothing if not a duellist of honor. Please, try to compose yourself.

--Yes, you&#39;re right, said Adeline, pulling away. I&#39;m acting so stupid. I&#39;m sorry.

--Nothing to apologize for, said Lavaud, extending his hand.

Adeline grasped it and began to walk. She pulled her cape tightly around her, imaging a dozen tiny nature spirits trying to pierce it but, finding human engineering too remarkable, turning away in anger and frustration. The image gave her some comfort as they lurked through the night. Soon the day broke. The Sun emerged as they exited the forest and came to another vast plain. Far in the distance the smoke still reigned supreme. The fire still blazed. Adeline thought of her family

---

Adeline and Lavaud made slow progress across the plain. Adeline stopped frequently, breaking down into tears, crying for her family, her station, her country, her home. During these bouts Lavaud stood above her, offering her no more comforting touches, but standing tall and noble, a peacock against the immense plain, the entirety of existence, and always looking to the horizon for any sign of activity.

Hours dripped away and there was none. The plain remained a placid pond, Adeline and Lavaud&#39;s long trek the only indication of temporality upon it. The Sun clawed its way across the sky, staring them down as it went, staring with something akin to indignation. Adeline kept her eyes forward. Her marble white eyes.

---

The riders approached from the west, their approach shrouded in a cloud of angry dust. Adeline dove to the ground then asked Lavaud to do the same. He refused. They&#39;ve already seen us, he said. They&#39;ve likely been tracking us, indicated by their direct and speedy approach. More of a cavalry charge than a search party. Lavaud would not lower himself by diving into the dirt, and Adeline should not either. Adeline rose, daring not to look at her duellist who, she was convinced, thought her the epitome of cowardice.

The pair held their stance, two figures posing for a grotesque portrait. Only one of us is worth portraying, thought Adeline. Perhaps the portrait means to show the juxtaposition between the noble and the ignoble. One possesses true nobility while the other only has pretend titles.

The riders arrived. Screaming wildly, they circled the pair for several seconds before coming to a hasty, disorganized stop. They had carbines, pistols, swords, and other, less conventional, weapons pointed.

--At ease, gentleman, said a voice from behind.

The voice emerged, on foot, having dismounted out of Adeline and Lavaud&#39;s sight. As such he seemed just to appear, absurdly, like he&#39;d teleported there from somewhere far off. He wore black: tall black boots, black pants, and a black, double breasted frock coat. He was not young, but hardly seemed old. Not like a human seems old. He was ancient, but only in bearing. Agewise, Adeline couldn&#39;t tell. His beard, scraggy and unkempt, leapt off his face. Sea foam. His hair, slick and wet, like matted seaweed, couldn&#39;t cover the massive bald spot on the crown of his head. Sunspots speckled it. He smiled as he approached. He was supported by a cane he didn&#39;t seem to need. His teeth, dirty and tilted, looked like jagged seashells washed up on the shore. The kind that prick your feet when you dance along the beach. But Adeline had never been to the beach. Her parents wouldn&#39;t have it. She&#39;d never seen the sea. She was going to die without seeing the sea.

She knew this man, or of him. He&#39;d been the captain of a ship. Noted for his bravery and despised for his insanity. He&#39;d flung himself into the sea. Dove down intending to die but found instead that he flourished. He found a company of mermen, gentle but wailing beasts. They mourned the loss of a loved one, a human woman who&#39;d left the sea for land and could never return. Lacked the strength to live in the sea. One of the mermen, surrounded by children, told the man this story. But he didn&#39;t care. He lived among the merman for a time but his insanity was even greater than that of the deep sea. He killed the merman and his children. He emerged from the ocean, dripping bloody seawater, and the woman in her church or at her spinning wheel saw him and knew immediately what he meant. She broke into tears. Stared at the ground of the dreary church or the floor of her dreary house or the gray grass that surrounded her dreary village. Her tears looked like rain. Rain would be the closest she&#39;d come to swimming in the sea again.

--Adeline, if I&#39;m not mistaken, said the man, coming to a stop. Please drop the pistol, Mr. Lavaud.

Lavaud had drawn his pistol the moment he saw the riders. He held it casually pointed.

--Suard, the Mad Captain… I remember you, said Lavaud, making no move to drop his weapon. I should have figured you&#39;d put in with the rabble.

Suard shrugged.

--You fancied yourself a duellist, didn&#39;t you? said Lavaud.

--I&#39;ve been experimenting with the vocation, said Suard, pointing to his chest. I&#39;ve already collected several of those fancy medallions.

Adeline looked to his chest. She almost vomited. She fell to her knees, pouring her eyes into the dirt. Lavaud stood taller than ever above her.

--Those are very nice, he said. Thought I suspect you didn&#39;t win those in a fair duel.

--Perhaps not, said Suard, smiling. But who will know?

--You, of course, though I suppose such things don&#39;t matter to you?

Suard shrugged, shrugged like a bored school child, unable to find the effort to answer his teacher&#39;s boring questions.

--It will please them to know they died undefeated. Miot in particular, he was always worried that his medallion would find its way onto the chest of another duellist. Although this is worse, from one perspective, nobody will think poorly of _him_ because of it.

--Nobody will think of him at all, said Suard.

He turned to look at Adeline, still bent over the dirt.

--Do you want to know what happened to your family?

--We already know, said Lavaud. You killed their duellists and took them captive. You&#39;ll ransom them like the fiend you are.

--Nonsense, of course we didn&#39;t do anything like that, laughed Suard. We were supposed to capture them, but we didn&#39;t. We&#39;ll tell Berger that they died in the fighting, but the truth is that we lined them up and shot each of them in the back of the head.

Adeline stared at the dirt. She could hardly see.

--The nobility disgusts me, said Suard. Look at her. Pathetic. What right does she have to act like that?

--I challenge you, Suard, said Lavaud.

--Challenge me? To what?

Suard laughed. The other riders laughed as well.

Adeline raised her face from the dirt, but didn&#39;t rise from her knees. She looked around. The laughing faces seemed to know something she did not.

--Whatever you want, said Lavaud. Quick draw, flintlocks, swords. If you choose flintlock or swords, you&#39;ll have to provide me with a weapon.

--I pick quick draw, said Suard.

He pulled a pistol from a hip holster. A six shooter, like Lavuad&#39;s, but much cheaper. Of the naval variety, simpler and a smaller caliber.

--One shot each, he said.

--Very well, said Lavaud. Now, for the stakes. If I am the victor-

But Lavaud would not be the victor. Without ever reholstering his weapon, Suard aimed and, before Lavaud could react, Suard shot him.

Blood stained Lavaud&#39;s white dulman as he tumbled to the ground. He tried to open his mouth to speak. Suard shot him again.

--You bastard! screamed Adeline, tears filling her eyes.

She was too tired to vomit.

--How could you?

--Pull the trigger, said Suard, walking over to Lavaud. He reached down and pulled Lavaud&#39;s medallion off his heart. Then he ripped off the duellist&#39;s sash, turned towards his men, and asked,

--Which one of you boys wants to be the one who killed…

He squinted his failing eyes at the first badge on the sash.

--Um… who is this, Adeline? Looks like a foreign medallion, but I could be wrong.

--He&#39;s supposed to be buried with those, said Adeline.

--Well he won&#39;t be, will he? Now tell me who this medallion belongs to. You must know, if your duellist thought to put him topsash.

--I challenge you, said Adeline.

She met Suard&#39;s eyes with her own. Her teeth clenched as tightly as her fists. Her breath reeked of near-vomit.

--You&#39;re a coward, and you may not care, but if you refuse my challenge, if you gun me down like you gunned down my duellist and my family, then all your soldiers will know you can&#39;t even stand up to a young woman in fair combat. You&#39;ll never be able to redeem yourself, never live with any honor. You&#39;ll be a beast, because a man without honor is a beast.

--We&#39;ve been beasts all along, said Suard. You more so than I.

His eyes were alight, not with fire, but with the setting orange Sun dancing atop a still sea.

--But I accept your challenge regardless. What weapon?

--Pistols, flintlock, the kind they used to use, said Adeline, figuring it gave her the best chance of victory.

--Do you have such a pistol on hand?

--No.

--Neither do I. Do you think everyone rides around with old duelling pistols ready and waiting?

--Fine, quick draw then, she said, reaching into Lavaud&#39;s cold hands, forcing apart his rigid fingers, and taking his pistol.

--One shot each, draw from the hip.

With trembling fingers she undid Lavaud&#39;s belt from his waist and fastened it around her own, adjusting it several notches to fit.

--And the stakes? aske Suard. Allow me to guess. If you are the victor, then you go free?

--No, if I&#39;m the victor, you bury Lavaud _with_ his sash and all his medallions. Including his own. He died undefeated.

Suard threw the medallion-studded sash and Lavaud&#39;s own medallion onto the ground.

--And you?

Adeline&#39;s eyes wandered past Suard. The smoke from the fire was miniscule at this distance, but she could still make it out. How devastating it had been, when it towered over her and filled the sky. Now everything was tinged with blue.

--I don&#39;t care what happens to me.

--And if I&#39;m the victor, said Suard, we get to distribute your darling duellist&#39;s medallions to our aching hearts&#39; content.

--Fine, agreed, said Adeline.

She holstered the pistol and stood still as Suard positioned himself.

--Mr. Caron, please count to five, aloud. Then, at an unpredictable point after that, call &quot;turn&quot; loudly and clearly. When turn is called, both duellists will turn and fire exactly one shot. Dear Adeline, shall this duel be to first blood or to death?

--First blood, said Adeline, forcing the tangle of words from her mouth.

--Very well, the first to draw blood shall be the winner. This duel will not end in a draw. If neither duellist draws blood on the first bullet, they shall reset and fire another bullet. This process will continue until blood is drawn. If both duellists draw blood on the same turn, the duel will continue in the same fashion until a turn is achieved in which only one duellist draws blood. If a duellist cannot continue the duel, his… or her… opponent will be declared the victor. Are these rules clear?

Adeline nodded. Suard turned. She turned too.

--Mr. Caron, begin counting now.

Caron counted. His accent was thick and, Adeline thought, rustic. But even shrouded, the words were familiar. One, two, three, four, five. Suard realized that he&#39;d told Caron to count the wrong way. Proper procedure would have him countdown from five. He considered correcting him but decided not to. After Caron reached five a silence overcame those assorted.

Suard&#39;s men, all country folk who possessed (or claimed to possess) some skill at riding or shooting, didn&#39;t want to see a young woman die for values they didn&#39;t understand. But nobody protested. Adeline, her world gone, was already dead. Her body just needed to catch up. And Suard, well, nobody could know what that deep sea creature thought.

Caron yelled turn. Adeline began to turn, but before she could do so a bullet smacked into her neck, ripped right through, and flew out the other side, soaring across the plain before gravity pulled it into the dirt.

Gravity did the same to her. She tumbled backwards as if she&#39;d tripped. She hit her back against the hard ground. Something cracked. She tried to speak, but found blood rushing down into her lungs. She began to choke. She spat up what blood she could. The blood came falling back down and covered her face and chin, soaking into her pores, turning her skin red, red like Miot&#39;s eagle, red like the swaying anemones in a sea she&#39;d never seen.

Suard had turned so quickly Adeline couldn&#39;t believe he hadn&#39;t cheated. But he hadn&#39;t and, having won the duel, he grabbed Lavaurd&#39;s sash and began ripping off medallions. He threw them to the men that sat unmoving on their horses, looking at Adeline with pity, wondering if they should put her out of her pain.

Then Suard came to Adeline and bent down beside her. Adeline looked into the darkness of his eyes. Eyes that no light could reach. He ripped off part of her cape and tied it around his right arm.

He retreated to somewhere Adeline couldn&#39;t see and so she looked to the sky. Had the smoke really spread across it? She couldn&#39;t tell whether or not it was the smoke from the fire, but it was clearly smoke, thick and all encompassing. She imagined her soul rising from her body only to be lost in its chaos. Unable to find its way to heaven it would dissipate and become part of the eternal gray. To everyone else the sky looked a bright, almost neon blue. Her blood seeped down her dolman and began to stain her cape.

--Anyone want one? she heard Suard asking.

Still passing out medallions? Forcing her head up as her remaining life pooled in the dirt around her, she could see Suard offering his men cigarettes. They all hurriedly declined.

Adeline should have shot him before Caron called turn. It would have been the dishonorable thing to do, but her life was spilling into the dirt and he was lighting himself a cigarette.

He stood smoking, looking silently across the plain, at the far-distant fire, or maybe past it, or maybe at nothing at all. The end of his cigarette, a tiny spark against immensity, filled Adeline with an incomprehensible dread.

---
---